Pyteomics
---------

`Pyteomics <https://pythonhosted.org/pyteomics/>`_ is a Python library that
provides parsers for various file formats used in proteomics. In addition the
library provides a very useful module for mass calculations and other tools to
work with proteomics data. When possible we try to rely on Pyteomics instead
of reimplementing everything.

Goloborodko, A.A.; Levitsky, L.I.; Ivanov, M.V.; and Gorshkov, M.V. (2013)
“Pyteomics - a Python Framework for Exploratory Data Analysis and Rapid
Software Prototyping in Proteomics”, Journal of The American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, 24(2), 301–304. DOI: 10.1007/s13361-012-0516-6


PSI-MS Controlled Vocabulary
----------------------------

Maspy bundles the ontology file "psi-ms.obo", which is a collection of
standardized terms used in mass spectrometry based proteomics. More
information about the project can be found `here
<http://www.psidev.info/groups/controlled-vocabularies>`_. The latest version
is available at `GitHub <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/HUPO-PSI/psi-ms-
CV/master/psi-ms.obo>`_.

Gerhard Mayer, Luisa Montecchi-Palazzi, David Ovelleiro, Andrew R. Jones,
Pierre-Alain Binz, Eric W. Deutsch, Matthew Chambers, Marius Kallhardt,
Fredrik Levander, James Shofstahl, Sandra Orchard, Juan Antonio Vizcaíno,
Henning Hermjakob, Christian Stephan, Helmut E. Meyer, Martin Eisenacher, on
behalf of the HUPO-PSI Group; The HUPO proteomics standards initiative- mass
spectrometry controlled vocabulary. Database (Oxford) 2013; 2013 bat009. doi:
10.1093/database/bat009

Unit Ontology
-------------

Maspy bundles the ontology file "unit.obo", which is a collection of defined
terms for units of measurements. This ontology is also used in the psi-ms
ontology. More details can be found at the official `GitHub repository
<https://github.com/bio-ontology-research-group/unit-ontology>`_. The latest
version is also available on github, `here <https://raw.githubusercontent.com
/bio-ontology-research-group/unit-ontology/master/unit.obo>`_.

Georgios V. Gkoutos, Paul N. Schofield, Robert Hoehndorf; The Units Ontology:
a tool for integrating units of measurement in science. Database (Oxford)
2012; 2012 bas033. doi: 10.1093/database/bas033
